[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hello, and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
The information that
you are about to hear
could radically change the
way that you live your life,
as it has for so many people who
have heard cellular biologist
Dr. Bruce Lipton speak.
Dr. Lipton is an internationally
recognized leader
on the connection between
science and spirit.
His groundbreaking
discoveries in the field
of the new biology
and epigenetics,
specifically, are the
foundation for human evolution.
He's won many awards, including
the Goi Peace Award, which
is the Japanese equivalent
to the Nobel Peace Prize.
It's such an honor to have
you here with us today.
Thank you so much
for joining us.
>>BRUCE LIPTON: Lisa, I
thank you so very much,
because we have some
wonderful information to share
and it's very
exciting, isn't it?
>>LISA: Yes.
To get this information out,
it really is transformational.
So, you have mentioned
to me previously
that we are in one of the
most groundbreaking times
and critical times in history.
And I've heard this many
times before, but specifically
in the realm of science,
what does this mean?
>>LIPTON: Well,
specifically, science
has revealed to us that
at the current moment,
we are facing
imminent extinction.
And the significance is why.
Well, let's go back
and recognize this.
Five times--
>>LISA: That's a huge statement.
That's a huge statement.
>>LIPTON: Well, it is.
And it's always surprising how
science will talk about this
and then it will just get
lost and nobody's-- it's sort
of like just too
big to think about.
>>LISA: That's why I had
to pause for a minute
there, because that's
a huge statement, yes.
So what do you mean by that?
>>LIPTON: Well, five
times in the history
of this planet, life got wiped
out and started all over again,
and these are called
mass extinctions.
And the five previous
mass extinctions
were due to things like comets
or asteroids hitting the Earth
and destroying the environment
and just wiping out life,
and then it started
all over again.
Science has recognized
that, today, we're
losing species at a
rate that is equivalent
to the mass extinction periods.
And the significance is the
source of this mass extinction,
according to science,
is much closer to home
than those comets and
asteroids because it is now
revealed that human behavior is
undermining the environment so
much that we are threatening
our own existence at this point.
I mean, to this weird fact
that, for example, science
realizes that perhaps
within the next 30 years
the fish will be fished
out of the ocean.
>>LISA: In 30 years?
>>LIPTON: In about
30 years, yeah.
We've already lost 90% of
what we call the predator
fish, the ones that we catch for
human consumption, 90% of them
are already gone.
And at the rate we're
harvesting fish and destroying
the ecosystem in
which the fish evolve,
we're actually facing
the loss of fish
on this planet, which is
like almost a science fiction
concept, planet
Earth with no fish.
>>LISA: Well, I mean, 30 years
is our children's generation.
I mean this is very,
very close to home.
>>LIPTON: Yes, this is
why it always is like, oh,
you know, we're talking about
some crazy stuff in politics
like gay marriage or
something like that,
and it's like, no, we're
facing an extinction.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: It's
time for us to own
that we must act collectively.
The concept of Gaia is brought
about by James Lovelock,
and he talked about the
Earth as a living system.
But, you know, recently, he
said it's already too late.
He said, kiss it
goodbye, it's gone.
There's nothing we
can do about it.
And it's like wow--
>>LISA: Wait a minute, yes.
>>LIPTON: -it's kind of freaky.
But the fact is this.
He's really not including
that human consciousness
is a very important part of
the unfolding of this planet.
And if we change
human consciousness,
and we have to do
it relatively soon,
there's a great opportunity
to save what we have
and then rebuild the garden.
>>LISA: So how do you
connect this very important
conversation that we're
having about evolution
and about our species on
this Earth to what you speak
about in terms of biology and
cellular biology and science?
>>LIPTON: Well,
very interesting.
What we've been finding
out in the recent science
is that human consciousness,
the way we think
and the way we behave,
is fundamentally
controlling the environment
in which we live.
And so basically, it says
that our belief systems are
very critical to the way
we live in the world.
So, for example,
today when we are just
destroying the environment
and making monocultures out
of what were just beautiful
gardens that the Earth offered,
this is totally antagonistic
to life on this planet.
The way that we're
polluting the water,
polluting the air, the
petrochemicals that
are going into the ground and
altering the animal species, as
well as ourselves, all
of these are influential
and yet we sort of
turn our eyes to them
and not really look at it.
And the fact is, science
is sort of saying,
it's time to open up your
eyes because we are really
treading on very
dangerous territory.
>>LISA: So opening up our eyes,
meaning our inner environment
as well as our
outer environment.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
This is, for me,
it's very interesting
because my work, which I
published in my first book
called "The Biology of
Belief" really talked
about how our beliefs
control our personal biology
and the life that we experience.
And in writing that
book, I started
to recognize, I said well, wait.
If we personally
create our own lives,
what is the consequence when
thousands or millions of people
share the exact same belief.
And all of a sudden I
said, yes, that's what
manifests the reality
that we're in.
So when culture changes
its belief system,
then the cultures
change as well.
>>LISA: That's why you
talk about, specifically
on the cellular level, how
it grows and how it dies
and how it moves towards
growth in a positive state,
and then it goes
towards degeneration
in a negative state.
That's basically what
our planet does, right?
>>LIPTON: It's exactly facing
that situation right now.
And it's very interesting
because Mother Nature
is a wonderful gardener,
takes care of this garden.
And then what she
will do is remove
what we would call
pests from the garden.
Anything that gets
into the garden that
destroys the harmony
of the environment,
nature will ultimately
eliminate and those things
will go extinct.
And, unfortunately,
at this moment,
we really-- we are those pests.
Human civilization is
undermining the garden.
>>LISA: Well, I don't think
that we need to be removed,
so what are the options?
What is the choice
at this point?
>>LIPTON: Well, the choice is
to recognize how we are actually
influencing the world and owning
the reality of human power
in altering the state
of the environment.
So we have to own
that we are involved.
A lot of people think oh, well,
humans can't change the Earth.
And it's like oh, my god,
yes we can and we are.
>>LISA: But how?
>>LIPTON: We're changing
it so profoundly.
I mean I remember when I went
to school I studied the three
seas in middle Europe, and they
were the ABC, the Aral Sea,
the Black Sea, and
the Caspian Sea.
Sea.
I remember how easy it
was to remember that.
And on the maps, you have
this beautiful picture
of a big inland
sea, the Aral Sea.
If you look at the
satellite picture today,
the Aral Sea is gone.
The entire sea is
essentially gone.
And it's like, what
happened to a whole sea that
was one of the biggest
seas in the world?
And the thing is people
started to divert the water
for irrigation of crops in
a desert, and at some point
not recognizing you can't
change these courses of nature
without affecting a greater
segment of the environment.
And so, we really have
to wake up to the fact,
yes, we are altering the
conditions of the environment,
changing agriculture,
the amount of pollution
that we're putting into
the air, all of this
has a profound effect on
global climate change.
And so the significance is that.
Now we're looking around
saying oh, my god, the weather
is so erratic and so changeable.
And it's like we
didn't necessarily
create global warming,
but we are surely
exacerbating the situation.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
So how can we take this
global conversation
and bring it to
a personal level?
How can we take our
thoughts and direct them
towards something that
goes towards growth
and goes towards solution?
>>LIPTON: First to
recognize that we
are active participants
in the process,
because we sort of take
ourselves out of the picture
and say, oh, the Earth is
going through this stuff.
No, the Earth isn't
going through it.
We are creating this upheaval.
So it's very interesting
because our beliefs
shape our cultures
and our civilization.
And this is why
it's so interesting
right now, for example, when
we understand the fact is this.
That civilization as we
know it is coming to an end,
as we know it is
coming to an end.
And it doesn't mean
the end of humans,
but it means the end of the
way of life that we're doing
and a new civilization
is coming forward.
>>LISA: And this
has happened before.
>>LIPTON: This-- in
Western civilization, this
is really the story of
Western civilization.
We go back over the
past and we say,
well, there have
been civilizations
that have come and gone.
So, for example, we talk
about the Roman civilization.
Oh, yes.
There was a Roman
civilization and it's gone.
And so, what happened here?
Well, if we just quickly
look at the history
of Western civilization,
what we find
is that there were
different civilizations,
that we started with
a civilization call
Animism, which is sort of
like the Native Americans,
the indigenous
people that learned
to live in harmony
with the world.
In fact, this is where we really
ultimately have to go back.
If you just consider what
the Native Americans said,
for example, that this is
a garden and their role
was to tend the garden.
Losing that-- we left
that Animistic period
and then entered into a
period call Polytheism.
And that was a
different civilization
where the Romans, the Greeks,
the Egyptians, many gods,
et cetera, came up.
That, like the Roman
civilization, ended.
And the new civilization
that came out of that
was called Monotheism.
That's when the Church
of Rome, for example,
gave the organization
and culture to the people
on the planet.
And interestingly enough,
even that civilization
came to an end about 1870
after Charles Darwin introduced
the notion of a biological
source of evolution
rather than the concept
of Genesis, for example.
>>LISA: Well, in that
place of Monotheism,
where we had the
particular culture that
was wrapped around various
religious beliefs and so forth,
was that designed originally
to grow a society?
>>LIPTON: Well, It's
very interesting.
Many things start out
with a very positive
this is what we're going
to do for the people.
It's actually a very interesting
insight if you think about it.
Many organizations start
out helping people.
Health care, OK,
education, government.
And at some point,
their original work
was indeed really
helping and facilitating
the growth of a population.
But if you look back at it,
this is an interesting point,
is that when they
reach a certain size,
they become an
institution themselves.
So all of a sudden,
it's like academia first
was just some teachers
teaching, but then it
became a university.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: OK.
And the significance,
once the institution
became so prominent, then the
efforts of the organization
actually then are not so
much on helping the people,
but on sustaining
the organization,
so that we lose the
benefit for the people
but we build these
massive organizations.
>>LISA: That's true.
It happens with
the justice system,
it happens with all of it.
It starts--
>>LIPTON: Health care.
>>LISA: -to take on its own.
Yeah.
Its own entity essentially.
>>LIPTON: So basically,
they start out pretty good
and then they go awry.
>>LISA: Why is that, though?
Why does that happen?
>>LIPTON: Well, I just
think there's some effort
to think well, maybe, if we put
more control, that we control
these things.
And that's a concept
of if I can control it,
then we can guide its direction.
Except, it's OK to
have an idea of control
if you have knowledge.
If you don't have knowledge,
then all of a sudden
your control may
go way off the edge
and actually you're not
helping people anymore,
but the net result is really
the damage that is accruing.
And so as you can see
for this situation,
we are in a civilization
that is coming to an end.
And we started off
with a concept--
>>LISA: As we knew it.
>>LIPTON: As we know it.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: And it's coming to an
end for a very simple reason.
We look around the world
and we see all these crises.
Oh, we have a peak fuel crisis,
we have an economic crisis,
we have political crises,
we have health care crisis.
We're even facing
religious crises.
And you say, well, wait.
Oh, let's talk about this
crisis or this crisis.
And I go no, no.
You're missing the point.
Talking about each crisis
is like looking at this tree
and here's another tree
and here's another tree.
The whole point is
pull back and recognize
all the trees are
making a forest.
The crises, we see them
as individual events,
are collectively saying
this is not sustainable
and that we're seeing
the feedback of we're
going in the wrong direction and
it's coming back in our face,
threatening our survival on this
particular planet right now.
>>LISA: So you had said now
we went from the Monotheism
into the survivalistic--
>>LIPTON: Scientific
from Monotheism.
The current version
of civilization
is officially
Scientific Materialism.
So you know what's
very interesting
to talk about is
that civilizations
are like living things, OK?
They have a life cycle.
Civilizations are created and
then they mature, and then
at some point they start
to go into a decline.
And it's very interesting
because in the beginning
of a civilization, just like
in the beginning of a child's
life, it's a period filled
with a lot of development.
It's a period filled with let's
try this and let's try this.
And as a civilization matures,
or as an individual matures,
then you get like
very rigid beliefs.
This is the belief,
this is the way it is.
And then when those
rigid beliefs come in,
this is the mature
state, so-called, OK?
Well, there's a
problem with rigidity.
If you live in a universe
were nothing stays the same,
it's always dynamically
moving, how can a civilization
hold on to a belief
and say this is
the only belief that we have?
And so, when we
hold these beliefs
and we hold that
rigid nature of it,
inevitably leads to challenges.
So that we go from a rigid
state of this is the way it is
and we start living that
way like we are now,
and the result is
but if we're not
living in harmony with the
planet, then the challenges
that we're facing are
the crises that we see.
And what are the
crises referring to?
They're referring
to the fact the way
you are living on the planet is
not in harmony with the planet.
And this is then
the period where
civilization goes into decline.
So what you're looking
at now is a world that
seems to be falling apart,
which it is actually,
but what's most interesting is
just because a civilization is
ending, doesn't mean
humans are gone.
There's a new civilization in
the process of being built.
There's always one
civilization follows another.
So right now--
>>LISA: It's interesting.
I was speaking with somebody
on the way here today
and he was saying that
change has happened
so much in his own
life, and his--
he gave himself an
analogy as a ship.
He said, I was a
ship in the ocean
and I was going steady for
so many years and so many
years, and all of a sudden,
it wasn't working anymore
to go steady.
Things kept changing around me
and corporations were folding
and environments were
shifting and changing.
You basically described
the cycle of life.
So in people thinking
that you can go along
in a normal course, these days
it is no longer applicable.
>>LIPTON: No, because
the belief systems--
the very fundamental
belief systems
that shape the culture and
the character of the way
we live on this planet.
I mean, we live by belief,
what we think is right,
so we follow this path.
If the belief is not right,
then the path we're following
is going to lead to a dead end.
And it's very
interesting because we're
starting to see it
fall apart right now.
And yet, while people
are getting nervous
about it falling
apart, I'm the guy
in the back of the room that's
jumping up and down going,
yeah, it's falling apart.
And the reason is
very simply this.
If we continue the
course we're on,
science has already
revealed what
the destination is, extinction.
So basically it says,
what do we need to do?
We need to--
>>LISA: Change the course.
>>LIPTON: -really reset.
Change the course.
Look at life in a different
way and start over again.
And it's interesting
because we're
facing like the Occupy
Wall Street Movement.
What does it represent?
People that are saying,
this isn't working anymore
and there's got
to be another way.
Well, this is great
because, as I said,
keeping the status quo is
death and that opening up
is something new.
So a new civilization
begins when
people start to pull
out of the structure
and start to consider
another way of life.
And we call these people
creative minorities
or cultural creatives,
the Millennial Group.
And the Millennial
Group, and this
is profound because this is
nearly half the population
of the United States or
the planet right now.
>>LISA: The Millennials.
>>LIPTON: The Millennials.
>>LISA: 20-somethings.
>>LIPTON: Well,
actually under 40.
>>LISA: Under 40, OK.
>>LIPTON: Under 40.
And this represents an
interesting group of people
because these young people
are finding it very difficult
to get into the structure.
They go to school.
They accumulate debt like crazy.
They get out of school
and then there's no jobs.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: And then they
start to feel like, well, I'm
not part of the system.
And many of them are like,
what are we going to do?
We're not part of the system.
And it's like, oh, wait, wait.
You don't understand.
You're playing--
The Millennials play
one of the most important
roles on this planet
right now for a
very simple reason.
Not being part of
the system means
they're not attached
to the system.
>>LISA: They're not
part of the old system.
>>LIPTON: They're not part
of the old system at all.
And when fewer and
fewer people are
holding on to the old
system, it becomes easier
to let the old system break down
and then create a new system.
>>LISA: New systems beyond that.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: Of course.
>>LIPTON: Well, people might
be in fear of what's going on
is really, look, we have to
change our perception of that.
It is our greatest
hope in the world
that these Millennials
and the children that
follow through them will
create a different world
than the one we're
living in right now.
>>LISA: That will come as a
relief to a lot of people who
are out of jobs,
that are looking
for jobs out of college,
can't find them,
or in a place where
they are trying
to create their own thing and
validate the fact that possibly
being an entrepreneur at this
day and age is a good thing.
>>LIPTON: Oh, absolutely.
That's what's so exciting is
we're on the edge of something
so brand new and exciting,
it's not the old path.
And so this offers a
whole new way of life.
And what's really
wonderful that I
see about it is that it really
represents an opportunity
to create community again.
We have lost community and
people are acting individually,
and this is actually stemming
from a Darwinian belief
that we bought into our
culture that our world is based
on the survival of the fittest.
Nature doesn't see that at all.
Nature really says it's not the
individuals that I care about.
Nature wants to
know, look, what's
the human population doing?
Don't tell me about
Mozart and don't tell me
about Einstein or Davinci,
those are wonderful individuals.
But it's not the individuals
nature is concerned about.
It's the mass of people.
What are we as a group doing?
And the fact is, well,
we're destroying the planet.
And we're doing it under a
cultural belief that says,
well, there's a
struggle for survival
and we must go out there and
fight each other for fitness.
Well, the issue is
evolution really
isn't based on a
struggle for survival.
>>LISA: Struggle for
survival any longer.
Well, it isn't.
Yes.
>>LIPTON: It's a
cooperative event.
And how do you get cooperation?
People have to come back
together in a community.
When we were looking at
us individualistically,
then I say, well, I don't care
I'm part of the community.
I'm going to make myself
the fittest, the survival
of the fittest, so I don't
care about the community.
The new evolution says, no.
It's the community that
provides for the evolution, not
the individual.
So that's why I get
very enthusiastic to see
the young people
out in the streets,
the young people saying
there's a better way,
rejecting the system, because--
>>LISA: They're right.
>>LIPTON: They're right.
And that's where
we're now going.
>>LISA: So these
are some old myths
that you're breaking down,
these are some old ways
of thinking that
you're breaking down
in order to bring about
the new ways of thinking.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
You see, it's very interesting
because a civilization
is based on a set of beliefs.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: OK.
And the beliefs are beliefs
related to the answers
to three fundamental
questions that
have been around for 10,000
years, the same questions
10,000 years, OK?
These questions are called
the Perennial Questions.
The Perennial Questions
are how did we get here,
why are we here, and
now that we're here,
how do we make the best of it.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Well, a very
interesting aspect about that
is simply this.
Whoever provides the
answers to the questions
that the public accepts,
two fundamental consequences
of that answer.
Number one, the answers
give shape to the culture.
And so basically
it says, if this
is what we believe
how life is to work,
then the culture will build
itself to that belief.
>>LISA: It shapes how the
culture is formed, OK.
>>LIPTON: So basically the
answers to the questions shape
the culture.
These are the
fundamental questions
and they are the
fundamental answers
that shape the world
that we live in.
And number two, whoever
provides us with those answers
also becomes what
we call the truth
provider for that civilization.
So questions other than
how did we get here
and why are we here,
all the other questions
are also directed
to these people.
So if we go back, let's say
the previous civilization
is Monotheism, OK?
And in Monotheism
I say, well, how
did you answer the questions
and who gave us the answers?
Well, the answers
came from the church.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: And the question
was how did we get here,
and the answer was
divine intervention.
The Sistine Chapel,
David and God
with the little
fingers like that.
And they said, well,
why are we here?
Well, according to the church,
the spiritual world isn't here.
The spiritual world
is off planet.
>>LISA: Outside of us, yes.
>>LIPTON: And so what
are we doing here?
And the answer is we're
testing ourselves.
We're seeing if we're
worthy enough to-
>>LISA: To get there.
>>LIPTON: -go to
the other place.
So then it says, then
your life on this planet
is to live out
plays of morality,
meaning is your life worthy
enough to go to the next place?
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And they say, well,
how do you make the best of it?
How can you do that?
And according to the
church, is just follow
the laws of the Bible.
So then they tell us these
are the rules of the Bible.
Once we bought those
answers and the civilization
called Monotheism was created
from a previous civilization,
Polytheism, the church not
only provided those answers,
but the church was the
source of our truth.
>>LISA: And it
provided-- it made
us believe that our answers
are outside of ourselves.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
And it separated us from
our spiritual connection.
So it sort of said,
look, we're the interface
between you and God.
And if you really
want to go with God,
then you have to
really walk through us
and we'll guide you
there and help you there,
and maybe you could
pay for your way there.
>>LISA: But it'll cost you.
>>LIPTON: Exactly.
It's sort of an
interesting club,
because they also
made a club out of it.
You're either part of our
organization or your dead.
And so, it's like, OK.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Yes.
>>LIPTON: And that really
put everybody together
and we then sought answers
to everything about life
from the guys wearing the
black frocks, the priests.
Well, this was the shaping
of that civilization.
At least there was a morality,
even if it wasn't operating
that way, there was
a morality behind it.
But the concepts change when
the answer to the first question
changes.
The first question was
how did we get here?
Well, the Church gave us
the whole story of Genesis,
the seven days of magic,
and all that kind of stuff.
>>LISA: Adam and Eve, yes.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
In about 1870, about 10 years
after Charles Darwin's "Origin
of Species" book,
civilization changed
because they accepted
a different answer.
And this new
civilization is what
we call Scientific
Materialism, OK?
So in Scientific Materialism,
I say, well, science took over.
What answers to the
questions did they provide?
So the first question
is how did we get here?
Well, the Darwinian
idea was oh, we
got here through random
genetic mutations.
It was just these
accidental mutations
that ultimately led to us.
And we say, oh, OK, cool.
Which really has great
influence on the second question
of why are we here?
This is a trouble spot because
according to a random mutation
consequence, why are we here?
And you say, well, I
don't know why we're here,
it was just an accident.
And all of a sudden,
humans had lost
a real purpose in
their existence.
Oh, we're here.
Why?
Well, genetics.
Accident, we don't know why.
And then the worst part of
the Scientific Materialism
comes in the third question.
The third question, well, how
do you make the best of it?
Well, when the
foundational insight
to the Theory of
Evolution is that we
are facing a
struggle for survival
in our effort to exist.
And that built in the concept
of the survival of the fittest
and said, this is
a jungle out here.
And how do you make
the best of it?
You live by the
laws of the jungle.
Now what's really interesting,
well, the previous generation,
Monotheism, at least had a
moral aspect of your life
should be something like
morally appropriate.
When it came to science,
science didn't offer morality.
It wasn't its job to do that.
Science's job is to
say how does it work?
And so science says,
look, it's based
on the survival of the fittest.
Well, the question is
that's the end, survival.
What is the means
to get to that end?
Well, that's where
science says, look,
it's not my job
to tell you that.
If you're the last one
standing, then you win, OK?
Well, what is the means
to get to the end,
you know like with Albert
Einstein or Mozart.
Is that what we're looking for
as a survival of the fittest?
And I say, well,
that could work,
but some jerk with an AK-47
could also be the last one.
And all of a sudden
you say, oh, my god.
We can do anything
it takes to succeed.
And when you look at
the world around us
you start to see, oh, my God,
people are ripping each other
off, people are
dominating each other.
And they do it not like
in a hostile manner,
they do it because they say
look at what the science said.
>>LISA: I need to survive.
>>LIPTON: And I can do
anything to survive.
And it's interesting because
when we bought the questions
from science, we also made
science a truth provider.
>>LISA: And science went
up against Monotheism
in a competitive--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: -way.
>>LIPTON: And so no
longer do the people
in today's civilization go
to the black-coated priests
for their truths, we go to the
white-coated priests called
the scientists--
>>LISA: Interesting
>>LIPTON: -who offer
us their answers.
So now this is OK-- if
the beliefs of science
are accurate, then following
their suggestions is
going to be great.
But if the beliefs are not
accurate, at that point
then it says those beliefs
could lead us to a termination.
Yes, exactly.
The extinction we've
been talking about.
>>LISA: So the
Darwinian philosophies
that you're talking about,
the survival of the fittest,
are the old science in
what your opinion is.
>>LIPTON: Oh, absolutely.
And it's destructive
science because that's
what we're living by, that's our
cultural way of life right now.
It says, look, if I
happen to beat you
and you're in the
ground, well, that's OK
because that's
the law of nature.
I'm going to beat you in
survival of the fittest.
And so you might
say, well, then OK,
if we're facing our extinction
because of this issue
about our beliefs
not being correct,
what should we do about it?
And I love it because
Albert Einstein,
he's one of my great
heroes of course.
Albert Einstein came
up with a very simple
often-repeated phrase.
People have heard it a lot,
but to me it's most important
at this moment and that is you
cannot solve the problems with
the same thinking that
created the problems.
The issue is this.
The institutions that we live
by-- science, government,
academia, et cetera--
have provided us
with belief systems, and we have
been following these beliefs.
And in following these beliefs,
now we face our own extinction.
What's the point?
The point is we have
to change the path.
And that's why so-- you know,
so people should recognize when
you see the institutions having
trouble, this is not bad.
It's because it's
the beliefs provided
by those institutions--
>>LISA: And it's those old
beliefs, those old systems that
are breaking down, which is
what we're experience, right?
>>LIPTON: Right, so when
you see it falling down,
you could look at it two
ways and go oh, my god, it's
the end of the system.
And I go yeah, great.
Because if it doesn't end,
extinction is the result.
So stand back and look at
it and say, yes, it's time
to change the beliefs
to live in a greater
harmony with the world than
with each other because we
are, indeed, facing
this evolution.
It is very exciting to be
alive now for this reason.
We are actually witnessing the
evolution of human civilization
to the next higher level.
Right now, we look
at human civilization
as individuals
competing and trying
to survive in this world.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>LIPTON: The
evolution we're facing
is not we're going to evolve and
change who we are biologically.
>>LISA: We're not
going to expire.
We're--
>>LIPTON: No.
No.
>>LISA: What we
knew is expiring.
>>LIPTON: Well, yeah.
The way we organize
is going to change.
What we're realizing is this.
We're going to learn, and
we're learning it right now,
humans are not
separate entities.
Humans collectively
are a super organism.
Each human is like a cell in
the body of a super organism
called humanity.
And that becomes important
because it says every human,
I don't care where
they are on the planet,
are part of the same humanity.
And when you have
a living system,
let's say a human body, in
which the cells are fighting
each other, that's
a disease called
autoimmune disease,
which a lot of people
are affected by because what's
going on in the outer world
is also being reflected
in the inner world.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>LIPTON: So the increase
in autoimmune disease,
which in Latin simply
means self-destruction,
we are facing that on
the planet now where
people have been fighting each
other and killing each other
and all that.
>>LISA: It's reflective of
what's going on in our world--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: -what's going
on in our bodies.
>>LIPTON: Our biology
is a complement
to the world in
which we live, so
that we're beginning
to see a change.
And especially the Millennials
are very critical aspects
of this new evolution
for a simple reason.
The nervous system
of this new structure
called humanity is
called the internet.
It's what connects 7 billion
cells into one system.
And what I so
appreciate about it
is when I travel
around the world
and I see other people
and young people
in all these other worlds, what
I start to realize-- it's like
if I'm in Russia--
when I was in Russia
and I look at the
young people and I go,
well, it's hard to
tell the difference
between these young
people in Russia
and the young people in
Santa Cruz, California.
And I start to recognize, yes.
They're beginning to recognize,
the younger people, they're
not part of this warring,
violent structure that
has preceded in our
history right now.
They, themselves, are
beginning to recognize--
they're the ones that are
recognizing that humans
are the same all over the place.
I mean, the whole Arab Spring
was internet generated.
>>LISA: It's all-- it's
creating its entire own culture,
its own environment.
>>LIPTON: Exactly.
>>LISA: That's so interesting.
That's very interesting.
So now these old myths
that are being broken down,
what are the new structures?
What is it?
>>LIPTON: Well, I
refer to what are
called the four myths
of the apocalypse.
And what I mean by this is these
are for beliefs that we bought
from science that if we continue
following these beliefs,
then we will inevitably see
the apocalypse that science is
suggesting is in our future, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And what's interesting
is these four beliefs science
provided for us during the
last couple hundred years,
and we have shaped our culture
based on these beliefs.
And now it turns out
that these beliefs
are flawed or outright wrong.
And the significance
is by following them,
that's why we're
facing our destruction.
So let's just list the four.
>>LISA: What are they?
Yeah, OK.
>>LIPTON: The first belief
is that biology, or our life
sciences, are run by
Newtonian physics.
And you go, so what
does that mean?
I say, well, the significance
of Newtonian physics
is that it's a physics that
emphasizes the material
universe and ignores
the invisible world.
It says everything that's
physical is real, count on it,
and that's what it's all about.
But the invisible
stuff, not too relevant.
Who cares?
And the invisible stuff is what?
Consciousness, spirit,
emotions, all these things.
It's like no, no.
Just look at the physical
body, look at the cells,
look at the chemistry.
So this is the way science
looks at human health,
just like the
physical nature of it.
And we say, what about the mind?
And they go, mind's
not relevant.
It's your chemistry
and your genes.
>>LISA: When you
go to the doctor,
they give you the physical
reading and diagnosis and then
a medication and that's
what you get, right?
>>LIPTON: Right.
And the issue is
there's a new science.
And it's actually not that
new, it's almost 100 years old.
And it's called quantum physics.
And what's the significance?
Quantum physics
completely turns the table
on Newtonian physics
for this reason.
It says, the primary controlling
influence in this universe
are the invisible
forces, the energy.
It's the energy that
shapes the material world.
And it's like
collectively, we talk
about all the energy in physics.
We call it the field.
Lynne McTaggart has a
great book on "The Field."
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>LIPTON: And we say,
well, what's the field?
Well it's the invisible
forces that are around us.
And I say well, what does
quantum physics say about this?
It says look, the field is
the soul governing agency
of matter.
This is a quote from
Albert Einstein.
And what does it mean?
The soul governing agency
of the physical realm
is not the physical realm
but the invisible energy.
>>LISA: What's outside
of the physical realm.
>>LIPTON: Well, the physical
realm turns out to be energy
as well, so that's--
>>LISA: Same thing.
So it's-- I see.
Right.
>>LIPTON: You see, when
we took the atom apart--
and everybody's
seen this in school.
The atom looks like a little
solar system, marbles,
ball bearings moving
around, stuff like that.
When they went inside to look
at those things, protons,
electrons, neutrons, they said,
well what are they made out of?
That's where the big
surprise came from.
Because they said,
what's a proton made of?
It's like when they
looked inside, energy.
Electron, what's it made out of?
Energy.
And all of a sudden, what
we perceive as physical
is just another form of energy.
>>LISA: Yes.
And that energy of
the physical body
is connected to the
energy of the field.
So as the energy of
the field changes,
it changes the energy
of our physical body.
And that's why the field is
considered the soul governing
agency of that particle
or material world.
>>LISA: So it's basically
really all interconnected.
>>LIPTON: Oh, that's
the whole idea.
There is no separation.
It's very interesting
because if you
ask me, well, give a
definition of the field.
And I would say, the field
represents invisible moving
forces that shape
the physical world.
And then I go, wow,
isn't that interesting.
There was a word spirit.
And I said, what's the
definition of spirit?
Invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
And so what's
really coming about
is a cycle that's
being completed.
We started off with an
awareness of spirituality,
but not really an
understanding of it,
but there was like that
mysterious invisible.
We went through a
whole history and what
does quantum physics
return us to?
It's, yes, there
is the equivalent
of that invisible
spiritual energy
and we also now
understand the mechanics.
And now all of a sudden, it
becomes scientific spirituality
in a sense.
It's like not mystical,
but it's part of our world.
>>LISA: I see.
That's how the gap has been
bridged by what your work is.
Now, you mentioned
a few other myths.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: You said
that there was four.
>>LIPTON: And the second
one is very critical.
And the second one
is that we've all
been programmed with the belief
that genes control our lives.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: I say, well,
why is that relevant?
And I say, well,
as far as we know,
we didn't pick the
genes we came with.
The genes that we have, if we
don't like the physical traits
that they provide,
then we say, well, I
can't do anything about it.
I can't change the genes.
And all of a sudden you start to
realize, you say wait a minute.
Genes control my life and
as science tried to show us
it controls behavior, emotions,
and physical characteristics.
And then you realize but
you don't control the genes.
Then all of a sudden,
we've been put back
just like in the
previous civilization.
Monotheism says, look, you
don't-- are not connected
to spirit.
Now, you're not
connected to your genes.
You can't change your genes.
Well, then all of a sudden,
it says, oh, my gosh.
I'm a victim of my heredity.
If there's cancer or diabetes
running in my family--
>>LISA: I'm going to get it.
>>LIPTON: -I'm going to get it.
What can I do about it?
Well, just like in the
previous civilization
when you find yourself
being a victim,
then you seek a rescuer.
So we go out there and
we look at the field
of allopathic medicine and say
look, I'm a victim of my genes.
What can you do to
help me overcome
the consequence of my genes and
what's running in my family?
Well, new science.
Genes-- yes, go ahead.
>>LISA: It's so interesting,
it's the first thing that you
write down when you go
into a doctor's office is
your genetic history, as if
it is a blueprint for you.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
And this is the biggest error
because since we believe
that that family lineage is
what's passing on the trait
and we believe that all traits
are controlled by genes, then
we don't really care
about the psychology
or what was going
on in the culture.
That's irrelevant.
You are genes.
You're manifesting
gene expression.
That takes you out of
the picture again, right?
But now we're beginning to
know a whole new understanding.
There's a whole new science.
Genetics, the
belief of genetics--
let's just make a
simple flat statement.
Genes control nothing.
They don't control anything.
Genes-- and we heard in
school and we all-- you go out
and talk to the average
person on the street.
>>LISA: That breaks every
single belief system out there.
It breaks all scientific
facts right now.
>>LIPTON: Well,
and it's profoundly
important for a simple reason.
Because if genes did control it
and we didn't pick the genes,
then by definition
we're out of control.
And so significantly,
there's a new science.
And let's just go
back for a sample
because how many times
have-- people talk every day.
Oh, a gene turned on,
a gene turned off,
a gene caused cancer.
And it turns out
those statements
are completely
false for a reason.
Genes are blueprints.
They're blueprints to make
the physical proteins that
give us our body.
And you say, well, yes they are
connected to our expression,
but do they control
the expression?
The answer is no.
Genes have no on and
genes have no off.
They're blueprints.
I love to put it in regard to,
look, if genes are blueprints,
think about it going to
an architect's office
and she's working
on a blueprint.
And you look over
her shoulder and you
say is your blueprint on or off?
And she'd looked at you
like, what are you, crazy?
There's no on and off.
And I go, precisely.
Genes are blueprints, but
they have no on, no off.
They don't have any
idea what's going
on in the world around them.
They're just blueprints.
We've been focusing on the
genes as being self-actualizing.
A gene makes a decision.
It turns out, absolutely
totally false.
A gene is a blueprint.
>>LISA: So a gene
cannot-- if someone, say,
has a cancer gene, it doesn't
automatically turn itself
on and express itself
as being cancer?
>>LIPTON: No.
No.
The concept of a cancer
gene is totally misleading,
because if I said I had a
gene that causes cancer,
then if I had that gene then
anybody who has that gene
should have cancer.
And you say, well, I
have a cancer gene,
and 67% of the
people have cancer.
And I go, yeah, really cool.
What about the 33% that
have the gene and they
don't have the cancer?
Explain that.
And all of a sudden,
it's like, oh,
we don't want to
talk about that.
And I say, well I don't care
if you want to talk about it
or not.
They have the gene, they
don't have the cancer.
You tell me why.
Because that's the new biology.
The new biology is not
asking about the ones
that have the cancer.
It really wants to know
how can you have the gene
and not have the cancer?
So it turns out
genes are blueprints,
but there's a contractor in
the body, a contractor that
selects the blueprints
and can modify
the blueprints by their
response to the environment.
You adjust your genetics by how
you respond to the environment.
Is nature's intelligence.
If my genes were prefixed
and the environment changed
and my genes didn't fit,
then the whole species
would die out.
>>LISA: So that's
what epigenetics is.
Epigenetics is--
>>LIPTON: The new
science, epigenetics.
And it sounds like
the original science
that almost everybody
out there in the world
has learned, it's call
genetics or genetic control,
which means control by genes.
The new science almost
sounds the same.
It's called epigenetics
or epigenetic control.
What you have to catch
is that little epi part.
Epi means above.
So we say the word
for skin is epidermis.
I say, what is epidermis?
Dermis is the layer
below the skin.
Epidermis is the layer
above the dermis, the skin.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: So epi means above.
So I say, what is
epigenetic control mean?
I go, control above the genes.
And now we start
to recognize how
the environment and our
perception of the environment
are responsible, not
for just selecting
the genes-- this fact I'm
going to say right now
is mind blowing.
How we perceive or
respond to the environment
can take every gene
blueprint that we have
and create thousands of
variations of proteins
from the same blueprint.
>>LISA: So it
completely can change
based on the environment,
and the environment
being your upbringing,
your thoughts, your health,
your food, all of that
is the environment.
>>LIPTON: All of
that is part of it.
And this is so empowering
for a very simple reason.
Genetic control,
I'm a victim, why?
I didn't pick them,
I can't change them,
I'm stuck with them.
Epigenetics says, no.
If you change the way
you respond to the world,
you change your genetic readout.
So, give you an example.
Only 10% of cancer
is heredity based.
90% of cancer are people
responding inappropriately
to the environment
and then creating
a variation on their genes
that leads to the cancer.
They didn't have an
inherent cancer gene.
They modified the
readout of their genes.
And then, of course, then
there's the flip side.
And the flip side is somebody
who has a terminal cancer
but changes their
perception or response
to the world around
them, and then
has what we call a
spontaneous remission.
And that's not a miracle.
It's just the fact
that you have changed
the relationship between
your perception and the genes
and you can rewrite the genes.
>>LISA: And we're going
to speak specifically
about what that has
to do with stress,
and how you can change
your response to stress
and your perception
of stress and not
activate the genetic
marker for cancer.
>>LIPTON: That's the whole idea.
We are so empowered,
and yet, we've
been programmed to believe
that we're victims.
And since perception
controls, if you
perceive you are a
victim, that perception
will manifest as expression.
There is a simple
quote from Henry Ford.
He says, if you
believe you can or you
believe you can't, you're right.
>>LISA: I have a
shirt with that, yes.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
So there's just two
more beliefs and then
we can go through these four.
>>LISA: OK, go ahead.
>>LIPTON: OK.
The third belief is the belief
that the world is really
a Darwinian world
and that we're here
on a competition for fitness
and survival in that world.
And it turns out the
evolution of the planet
is not a competition.
We referred once to that
there was a garden here.
And if you understand
the nature of a garden,
a garden is not an
expression of competition.
A garden is an expression
of total cooperation.
And so the reality is what
happened to the garden?
The answer is once
we put in competition
instead of cooperation--
>>LISA: Our pesticides and--
>>LIPTON: -and everything.
We destroy them because
we're going to say, look,
we don't want to
cooperate with you.
We want you to do what
we want you to do.
So human domination of nature
has been the whole concept
that science could
dominate nature.
And it's like, no,
I don't think so.
The reality is our
meddling with nature
is actually responsible for the
looming extinction right now.
So there's a new understanding.
It's not the survival
of the fittest.
I created a new
word, fittingest.
It's a survival
of the fittingest,
meaning those organisms that
cooperate with the garden are
going to be encouraged
by the garden
to maintain its
existence on the planet.
Those organisms
that are actually
competing with the
garden or interfering
with the garden,
nature will tend
to eliminate those
organisms over time.
They will go extinct.
And then you look at
human civilization,
and you go, yeah,
nature's not really
pretty happy with
the destruction
that we have wrought.
So we're sort of like fleas on
the back of nature right now,
and she's trying
to shake us off.
And the issue is either we
learn to work with her--
>>LISA: In cooperation, yes.
>>LIPTON: -or nature's going
to be here, we'll just be gone.
>>LISA: All right.
So you mentioned that
there were four myths.
>>LIPTON: OK.
And we have one more left.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And the fourth
one is the concept
that evolution is
a random process.
This is the belief
in Darwinian theory
that the mutations that
kick everything off
are called random mutations,
genetic accidents.
The significance of
that is if we got here
through random mutations, you
might say then why are we here?
And then I have to say,
it was just an accident.
It was just shaking
genetic dice.
If a mutation would have
gone left instead of right
a million years ago, maybe
we wouldn't be here today.
That's the belief.
The new belief
reveals, no, it's not
random mutations that really
provided for our existence,
it's something new.
It's called an
adaptive mutation.
And what it really
means is this,
is that we and every
other organism that
is in this environment got
here as part of an effort
to adapt and conform and
support the environment,
the garden in that we live.
>>LISA: Explain that.
>>LIPTON: So it basically
says when an organism comes
into an environment,
it has a tendency
to alter the environment.
It's going to eat.
It's going to leave
waste materials behind.
It's going to alter
the environment.
Well, the idea if I bring in
an organism to create harmony
and then at some point
it gets out of balance,
nature introduces
another organism
that will then try to
rebalance it again.
And so a new organism
comes in to compensate
for the previous organism,
but then ultimately this one
may throw it out of balance so
another organism is introduced.
You keep adding organisms to
create harmony and balance.
And every time you
add an organism,
it has more power and
influence in creating
harmony and balance.
And you say, OK,
what about humans?
Well, we're near the top
of this one after the other
after the other.
And being near the top,
we have so much power
in altering or
influencing environment
that without knowledge
of our effort of trying
to keep harmony in the garden,
the same powers that we have,
have led to the current state
of destroying the garden.
And so it's really
the fact is no, no.
We have to recognize we
didn't get here by action,
we actually have a job and
that is to tend the garden.
So it's interesting--
>>LISA: To get ourselves
out of it, yes.
>>LIPTON: The new
civilization ultimately
comes back in a circle back
to the original animus, who
were spiritual and material,
and also as the Native Americans
said, we are here
to tend the garden,
and we've lost that mission.
And as a result, the
looming extinction
is an expression of
we're out of balance.
>>LISA: So we are
here now to tend
our own environmental garden of
our thoughts, our surroundings,
our environment in order
to positively impact
our own genes, right?
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
Old hippie statement, before
you go out and change the world,
take care of your backyard.
And I think when we
come back, basically--
>>LISA: Old hippie statement.
Very profound.
Old hippie statement.
Good.
>>LIPTON: We're going
to come back and learn
that before we can go out there
and evolve with the world,
we first have to
recognize who we are
and evolve ourselves
so that we become
a contributing element
to a future civilization.
>>LISA: Yes.
And this is really-- we're
going to cover the how on this,
exactly how the cells do
respond to the environment.
We're going to see that
through Petri dish slides.
And this is what I meant by
this information could radically
change the way that
you live your life.
When you really
truly see the impact
of your thoughts and
positive thoughts
and our perception
of those thoughts
on the growth of
the cell, you'll
understand what it means to
have those positive thoughts.
We'll be right back.
This is Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
>>LISA: Welcome back.
My guess is cellular
biologist Dr. Bruce Lipton,
and we're talking about how our
environment affects our cells.
But first, I need to ask
you how did your environment
affect your work?
I mean, where did you
start with all this passion
that you have around
epigenetics in your work
as a cellular biologist?
>>LIPTON: Well,
interestingly enough, it
started when I was
in second grade,
so it was a real early kick.
And basically what happened
was in second grade,
I remember a science teacher
brought in a microscope
and that was the
first time any of us
kids really saw a microscope.
And inside that microscope
was a slide with amoebas
and paramecium and
stuff like that.
Now, you got to realize,
as second graders
we're just little kids and
everything in the world
is so big around us.
And when I had my
chance to stand up
and I looked in that microscope
and I put my eye down there
and I finally saw
it, I said [GASPS].
It was like these little things
were moving around in there
and there was this
little world that
was so small you
couldn't even see it.
And so now I'm a
big guy and those
are these little tiny things.
And even in the
mind of my childhood
at that moment, when I
looked at these cells,
I realized they weren't
like a pinball bouncing all
over the place just randomly.
They moved over here and
looked at something apparently,
and then moved back and
they looked over here.
And then they bumped
into each other.
When they were bumping,
they were communicating.
And in my child
mind I said, my god,
they're like little people.
There's a whole little
world under there
and they're having
this whole thing.
And it was really
interesting because from that
was the very foundation of my
first look into a microscope.
And then I went through high
school biology and college
biology major, and
then graduate school.
And ended up being an
electron microscopist.
An electron microscopist, the
regular lighted microscope
you can see cells.
In the electron
microscope, you get down
into the molecules that
are making up the cell.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>LIPTON: And it was
the most exciting career
I could ever imagine
because every day
when I went to the lab
and turned on the electron
microscope and started
to look in there,
it was sort of like the
complete opposite of going out
into deep space.
It was like going
>>LISA: Wow.
>>LIPTON: And I would
see things every day
that no human had ever
seen in the world before.
>>LISA: And yet, they
existed inside your body.
>>LIPTON: Exactly.
And it was like another world.
And it really brought me back
to the original childhood
experience that
cells are, indeed,
miniature living people.
And a very interesting fact.
All the functions that we
see in our human body--
digestive, respiratory
system, excretory, muscle,
all these things,
even immune system--
virtually every
single cell organism
has every one of those systems.
>>LISA: Every function?
>>LIPTON: Every function.
These cells even have an
immune system, digestive,
respiratory,
reproductive system.
Cells have a social community.
Cells exchange ideas.
Cells create construction.
So it's just so interesting
that after all those years
to come back and find my
god, they are little people.
>>LISA: Did you
have a relationship
with these little things?
You would go there and
you'd get to see now
what are you doing today and
how are you communicating?
>>LIPTON: I absolutely did.
And what was so exciting
is because I would
put these cells into
a tissue culture--
I was also doing
cloning stem cells.
And this was really fun because
I was cloning stem cells back
in 1967.
Now that was like 45 years ago.
A lot of people
think oh, stem cells.
That's that recent
biology stuff.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: It's like, well, I was
working on them 45 years ago.
There were only a handful of
us in the entire world that
had any idea of stem cells
and I was cloning them.
And what was so neat about
it and this was so cool
because at some point, as I
was doing these experiments
with stem cells, I was also
teaching medical students
about the nature
of how cells work,
the conventional understanding
that genes control life
and biochemistry,
blah, blah, blah.
>>LISA: That's your day job?
>>LIPTON: That was a day job.
And yet, I would come in
the lab and these cells
would show me a world.
I would look at them
and say, oh, my god,
what are you guys doing?
And when I started
to observe them,
I was completely blown
away because I started
to realize what I was
teaching in medical school
was so incorrect in
regard to how cells work
that, ultimately, I found
that I really couldn't
in good integrity stay and
teach in the medical school.
I had tenure.
I walked out of the
university because I realized
I am teaching totally
incorrect information.
Now, of course when I
walked out the university,
all my colleagues looked at
me, it's like, you're weird.
>>LISA: What's wrong with him.
>>LIPTON: What's wrong with you?
And it's like, that stuff is--
you know, that's artifact.
That's not real.
Because it so conflicted with
the conventional belief system
that they sort of just ignored
me and sidelined my work.
And at some point, I had at
least the fortunate opportunity
to come back later at Stanford
and redo these experiments
and then come out with even
more powerful conclusions that
were absolutely so far ahead
of the conventional academic
curriculum.
And so I can sit here today and
say, yeah, in the beginning--
I love this part--in the
beginning I would tell
my scientific colleagues
about look at this research
and the meaning of it.
And they would look at me
and go, wow, you're so weird,
that's like you're crazy.
And it's funny because
if I went to a biologist
today and actually said this is
what my research was all about
and this is what it showed,
they would look at me and go,
so what are you
saying that's new?
>>LISA: That's new.
>>LIPTON: So essentially, I
went from freaking them out
to boring them.
But the reality is I
saw it a long time ago,
and it has now become the
main front of the new science.
And the new science
is called epigenetics.
>>LISA: And you have
received awards and changed
the face of what we
know as the new biology.
It really is.
And for people that might
not even know about this yet,
this is one of the
reasons why I wanted
you to be on the show is to let
even more people know there is
a new biology, but it has
a much grander impact.
That it's not just
about the cells,
but it has to do
with our evolution.
>>LIPTON: Oh, absolutely.
And it's so exciting because if
you understand the new science,
it's so involved with
personal empowerment.
It personally says you don't
realize how powerful you
are as a human being
because our limiting beliefs
that we acquired from
the incorrect science
prevent us from taking
charge of our own lives.
And then we see ourselves as
victims of our biology, victims
of our genes or biochemistry.
And it turns out, my
god, we're the farthest
thing from victims.
We are masters.
We can control every
aspect of our biology.
So it's time for people
to gather this power.
Why?
Because the new civilization
says that we all
have to know who we really are
so that when we collectively
work and put our powers
together in harmony,
the extinction that
seems to be looming
will actually disappear.
It will just disappear.
>>LISA: Because of how
powerful that we really are.
Once we realize that, yes.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
Because the power that
we've been using right now
is incorrect, and
therefore, destructive.
If we turn the tables
and redirect that power,
then the greatest blossoming
of a garden is available.
And it's not that far away.
We can do it almost overnight.
>>LISA: I love how you
connect what I speak about
and what I do in terms
of an interviewer
on the positive
thinking process.
But you break it down to the
cellular biology of positive
though.
This isn't just rhetoric,
this isn't just affirmations,
this isn't just a
feel-good conversation.
>>LIPTON: No.
>>LISA: This is something that
has grounded science to it.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
And this is very important
because there's so
many people who are
distrustful of this concept.
You say positive thinking,
they go, oh, you new age guy
and all that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: And I'm going no, no.
There's a reason why
positive thinking works
and there's a reason
why it doesn't work.
If you understand that, then
you can change the tables
and not be a victim
anymore, but actually
turn your positive thinking
into creating a positive life.
>>LISA: OK, so let's
talk about that.
How exactly are our genes
affected by their environment?
>>LIPTON: OK, let's go back
to a very simple experiment
that is so simple that
even if you're not
a biologist the answer is so
profound you can understand it,
no question.
>>LISA: Good.
>>LIPTON: OK, so we go
back to let's say 1967,
and I'm cloning a stem cell.
You say, well,
what's a stem cell?
I say well, in truth, a stem
cell is an embryonic cell.
It's a multi-potential cell.
It can form bone, skin, muscle.
It could form any
of the systems.
>>LISA: How do you clone it?
>>LIPTON: Well, actually
you take a piece of tissue.
You take enzymes to
break the cells apart.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Now you
have a Petri plate
with lots of different cells
and there are characteristics
that you can say, oh, that
cell is one of the stem cells.
There's a physical
characteristic
of the ones I was working with.
I say, oh, cool.
If I put like a
little glass ring
around that stem cell and
then I put a little enzyme
in the solution so it
comes off the Petri plate,
and I take that little
drop with one cell
and I add that to a Petri
dish and I add one stem cell.
Now, the significance
is the cell
divides every 10 to 12 hours.
And so first there's one,
then there's two, 4, 8, 16,
et cetera.
After about two weeks,
I've got thousands
of cells in the Petri dish.
Well, that's not the experiment.
But what it really
shows is this.
I have thousands of cells, but
here's the most important part.
They all came from
the same parent.
So by definition,
I have thousands
of genetically identical cells.
Now here's where the
experiment comes from.
I go to that master
dish with my stem cells
and I take out
some of the cells.
And I put them into a
separate Petri dish by itself,
but I change the environment.
You say, what's the environment?
And I say, well,
cells are like fish.
They live in like an aquarium.
So you have to put all the
right components in the aquarium
so they can live and breathe
and eat and live in that world.
So that's called culture medium.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: So, it's
the environment.
So I have a chemical composition
of this culture medium.
I put cells in that dish, so
let's call it Environment A.
And the cells form muscle.
I go, that's great, nice.
I go wait, wait.
Go back to the original dish
with the original stem cells,
grab some more
cells and put them
into yet another dish with
Environment B, a slightly
different culture environment.
And in this environment,
the cells form bone.
And then the last step, I go
back to the original dish,
get some more cells out
of the original dish.
Put them in a third
Petri dish yet
with a different
Environment C. And when
I do that, they form fat cells.
Now--
>>LISA: Now what are you doing
to change the environment?
You're just changing
the enzymatic structure?
>>LIPTON: Changing
the composition
of the growth medium.
>>LISA: OK, got it.
>>LIPTON: Just the chemistry.
And so now I come back
and I say, well, look.
What controls the
fate of the cells?
Our convention, and what
I was teaching is genes
control the fate of the cells.
And I say, well, first
of all, all these cells
are genetically identical
so you can't tell me
because it forms
muscle in one dish
and bone and fat in
another dish that the genes
did that because they
all have the same genes.
>>LISA: Because when you
put them in a different dish
when you kept the environment
the same, they would replicate.
>>LIPTON: Exactly the same.
>>LISA: Exactly the same.
>>LIPTON: But if I
change the environment,
they would become
something different.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>LIPTON: So then you're left--
even if you don't know biology,
I say, well, what controls
the fate of the cell?
And the answer was
obviously the genes
were all the same so
it wasn't the genes.
I say, it was the conditions
or the composition
of the environment.
And therefore in
different environments,
the cells have different fate.
Now here's an exciting piece
of information and look at it
this way.
I have a plastic dish
of cells and I have
what I call a
healthy environment.
You know, a nice balanced
environment culture medium.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And I take
this dish and I move it
to a less than optimum
environment, not
a good environment.
The cells will
start to get sick.
And if I had a conventional
allopathic doctor
look at my cells, he'd say,
Bruce, your cells are sick.
You should give them some drugs.
And I go, absolutely not.
All you have to do
is take the cells
from the less than optimum
environment, put it back
into the good environment,
the cells will instantaneously
recover their health and
the cultures will flourish.
The point is this.
The cells and their
genetic expression
become a complement
to the environment.
And when you are not healthy--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: -then you're
really just reflecting
that you're not in harmony
or your environment
is not supportive.
Let's-- one caveat so we
don't go way off track.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: You can have gene
defects that can cause illness.
>>LISA: OK, yes.
>>LIPTON: These are
called birth defects.
You were born with genes that
were altered in such a way
that they're not giving you--
>>LISA: And what is
the percentage of that?
>>LIPTON: Less than 5%.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: What does that mean?
95% of the people on
this planet came here
with a set of genes
that should offer them
a healthy, happy, harmonious
existence on this planet.
>>LISA: But within that set of
genes are the cancer gene is
present, and maybe the
diabetic gene, and maybe the--
>>LIPTON: Ah, but you
see, this is the fact.
Is it a diabetic gene or
a diabetic environment?
Is it a cancer gene or a
cancer causing environment?
>>LISA: Yeah, so we
have these genes that
may be present
from our genetics.
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: However, you put it
into a stressful environment
and it expresses the gene and
activates the gene, right?
>>LIPTON: Right.
So for example, let's say
you have a particular cancer
and you go to the doctor and
the doctor says, oh, my god,
you have this particular
cancer going on.
And then I say, OK.
Well, first of all they
will say you have this gene.
I say, OK, first how many people
with this gene get the cancer?
And they say, OK, in
this particular gene
67% of the people that
have this gene get cancer.
And everybody
starts to freak out
because that's more than 1%.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: And everybody
is like either--
>>LISA: There's a number there.
>>LIPTON: -focused on
that and I go, yeah,
but you're not asking the
more important question.
Apparently 33% of the
people with this gene
don't have the cancer and
they have the same gene.
So is it the gene that
causes the cancer?
And the answer is no.
Because you can have the
gene and not have the cancer.
So the question is,
it's not just the gene;
it's the response
to the environment,
and this is part of
this new science.
So my effort was, well, how
does the environmental signal
control the genes?
Well, the first thing is this.
The control is not in the genes.
That's a given.
And I started to recognize
that the organism reads
the environmental information
and then adjusts the genes
to balance itself against
that particular environment.
So if you're in an
unhealthy environment,
you will select gene activity
that's not a healthy gene
activity but one
that complements
the unhealthy environment.
>>LISA: Stressful
environment, OK.
>>LIPTON: And if you
really want to recover,
you don't have to
change the genes,
the genes change when you
change the environment.
>>LISA: It's such an-- that is--
I can understand why this was
an exciting fact
for you to discover
and I can understand why
you stopped teaching.
>>LIPTON: Well, there I am
teaching medical students
genes control your life,
and then I walk into the lab
and the cells are
saying, yeah, right.
Look, change the
environment and you
change the genetic activity.
So that was presaging the
concept called epigenetics.
Epigenetics as a science was
officially named in 1995.
I saw the action and the
mechanics of it in 1967.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
Yes.
>>LIPTON: So really, it was
so far ahead of the game,
so when I started reporting
it to my colleagues,
they were not at that level.
>>LISA: Accepting it, right.
>>LIPTON: And therefore, they
looked at it as like, oh,
that's interesting
but it's not real.
>>LISA: OK, so this is all great
for a Petri dish and cells,
but how does this relate to us
as walking around human beings?
>>LIPTON: Well, the very
interesting parallel is this.
When we look in a
mirror and see ourselves
as individual entities, a
human, I'm Bruce, you're Lisa,
I say that's a misperception
because we're not
single entities.
By truth, we are actually
about 50 trillion cells
living in harmony
in a community.
So when you look at yourself,
it's not a single entity.
It's a community of
50 trillion cells.
Well, the interesting
correlation is this.
We are essentially
skin-covered Petri dishes
with 50 trillion cells inside.
And there's a culture medium
in there as well called blood.
So the parallels, if I
change the culture medium
to cells in a plastic
dish is no different
if I alter the culture medium
to cells in a skin-covered Petri
dish.
So as I said, take a plastic
dish from a good environment
in a bad environment,
the cells get sick.
Take a human
skin-covered Petri dish
from a good environment
to a bad environment
and the cells will get sick, OK?
>>LISA: Same thing.
>>LIPTON: Exact same thing, so
it doesn't make a difference
if the cells are
in plastic or skin.
So now here's the issue.
So we find out from the study
the culture medium controls
the fate of the cells.
Then I say, yeah, but
the culture medium
in my skin-covered
dish is called blood.
So the question is,
well, then, how or what
controls the composition of
the culture medium because
in the end, that
composition is going
to affect the fate of the cells.
>>LISA: So how does our
environment control our blood?
Is that what you said?
>>LIPTON: Yeah, the
chemistry of the blood,
which is culture medium.
So I say, OK, so we
look at the environment
and we have signals
on the outside,
we also have signals on
our internal environment.
I say, yeah, but what
reads the signals?
And I say, the nervous
system reads the signals.
The nervous system provides
what we call perception.
My eyes perceive
light, et cetera,
and so we have perception.
So the organism, being
us humans in this case,
perceive the environment
through the nervous system.
But there's now one other
step when it comes to humans
and that is the perception
is not just direct,
but it's associated
with the mind
because we interpret
what we see.
So a perception of the
environment comes in,
we make an interpretation
called the mind.
And then the mind feeds back
to the brain and in regard
to the interpretation
of that perception,
the brain releases different
chemistry into the blood
and that goes around
to all the cells.
Or the signals can go from
the nervous system via nerves
and directly give the
signals to the cells.
And the simple point is this.
The cells, their behavior,
and their genetics
are affected by the signals.
But the signals are
mediated by the brain, which
are in turn controlled
by our mind.
>>LISA: So the mind has
the perception of something
and then feeds
that to the cells.
So you could be in, say,
maybe a stressful environment,
but your perception
of that stress
is what directly relates to
the environment of the body.
That inner Petri dish, right?
>>LIPTON: Yeah, it's actually
more the interpretation
of that perception.
So I give an example
about the difference
between interpretation
and perception.
I love extremely hot food,
like with jalapeno peppers.
If I'm sweating
and eating a meal,
that means I'm having
a good time, OK?
>>LISA: That's terrifying to me.
>>LIPTON: Well, see that's
the interesting thing.
I eat the jalapeno
pepper, and I have
a perception of jalapeno pepper.
You eat a jalapeno pepper,
you have a perception.
>>LISA: Pain.
>>LIPTON: Pain, well, no.
But there's an interpretation.
You see, so we both
ate the same pepper.
The nervous system picked
up the same information.
But when you feel
that in your body,
your mind interprets that as
like, oh, my god, stressful.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: When I have the
same chemistry in my body,
my interpretation of that
is, oh, that's really great.
So what's the difference?
It's not the perception, it's
basically the interpretation.
>>LISA: My husband's like that.
He pours hot sauce on
everything that I make.
I think it's my cooking.
But the bottom line
is that yes, it's
my perception of
the jalapeno pepper.
>>LIPTON: It's your
interpretation.
>>LISA: My interpretation of it.
OK, so you travel around
the world, the globe,
multi continents, you're
all over the planet.
So how is it that you do not
perceive that as stressful,
whereas somebody else could?
>>LIPTON: Because the idea
is-- the perception is,
OK, I'm going to sit in
the same stupid airplane
in the same stupid airport and
go through all that same stuff.
>>LISA: Stupid security.
>>LIPTON: Now, the guy
next to me is like, damn,
I go through this stuff.
I hate this stuff.
And it's like-- and the more
you hate it, the more, what?
Your brain is
releasing chemicals
that this is not
good, this is bad.
And the chemicals are not
going to make a good response.
If I sit in the same airplane--
>>LISA: Stress levels rise.
>>LIPTON: Their stress
level rises, OK?
I sit in the same
airplane and go, look,
I've done this so many times,
like, I'm not paying attention.
Why?
We go through this every
time so why should I
give it any more energy?
So I just disconnect.
I can sit there and think
of more wonderful things.
If I'm thinking of my partner,
Margaret, for example,
I'm not releasing
stress hormones.
I'm releasing a completely
different set of hormones.
In fact, if I could
illustrate it.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: I like this.
My friend who creates
the covers of my books
took this idea for me and showed
that I'm a cell biologist, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: But all of
us, as individually,
we're controlling
our own cell cultures
that are inside our body.
So the brain is releasing
the chemicals that
create the cell culture
medium and, remember,
the environmental
medium controlled
the fate of the cells.
So while I'm a cell
biologist, all of us
personally are what we
would call self-biologists.
You're creating
your own biology.
>>LISA: That's so interesting.
Yes.
Absolutely.
>>LIPTON: Now I say, OK,
so what does it mean?
It says when I
respond to the world,
my interpretation
causes neurochemicals
to be released by my
brain that correspond
with that interpretation.
Those chemicals are
then go into the blood.
And then that blood is
used to feed the cells.
So depending on the
chemistry of the blood,
it will organize the
fate of the cells.
>>LISA: So if it excretes
the hormone cortisol--
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's a
stress hormone, right?
>>LIPTON: That's a totally
different response.
For example, let's say I open my
eyes and I see someone I love.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: When I do that, I
release into my blood chemicals
from the brain such as dopamine,
oxytocin, vasopressin, growth
hormone.
These chemicals--
let me just tell you,
if I took those chemicals
released in love
and put it into a plastic
Petri dish with cells,
the cells would grow
exuberantly well.
And I think about it and I just
say, look, go back to a time
when you were really in a
state of exquisite love,
like a honeymoon.
And I say, were you healthy?
And most everybody goes, well,
I was exuberantly healthy.
And I go, well, you know why?
Because when you're
in a state of love
the chemistry you
release in the blood
is a chemistry that
encourages health and vitality
and energy in the system.
And I say, oh, that's cool.
And I say, well, wait, wait.
What if I open up my
eyes and I see something
that scares me so I'm in fear?
I go, oh.
The chemicals of love are
not going to released now.
Now you're going to
release the cortisol,
now you're going to
release stress hormones,
and cytokines, and histamines.
These elements get us ready
for fight or flight, OK?
Well, the relevance is
if I took those chemicals
and put it into a
plastic Petri dish,
it stops the growth of my cells.
And it does that because
it's going to conserve energy
for running, fight or flight.
So the point is this.
If you open your eyes
and you're in love,
you create a growth
medium that causes
the cells to be exuberantly
happy and healthy.
But if you open
your eyes and you
see something that stresses,
then all of a sudden
the chemistry
released by that is
chemistry that shuts
down the growth
and maintenance of the cells.
So guess what?
We know now for-- it's a fact.
90% of doctor visits are due to
stress, and the reason is why?
Because if you keep releasing
the stress hormones,
you keep shutting down
the growth of the cells.
>>LISA: That cell.
And it's also replicating in
terms of a destructed cell.
That cell is now--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: -degenerating and
replicating degeneration
and then replicating
more degeneration.
>>LIPTON: Right, because the
signals that are released--
>>LISA: -and that's
what you call cancer.
>>LIPTON: The signals
that are released
are the signals that engage
inappropriate growth signals.
They're not for growth at
all, they're for protection.
And you have to look at it.
Growth and protection are
mutually opposite things,
and the reason is why?
Well, if a stimulus
causes growth,
it's something you move
to with your arms open.
Take it in, assimilate, grow.
But if there's a stimulus out
there that is threatening,
you don't move to
the stimulus, you
move away from the stimulus.
And not only that, but you
also close yourself down,
protection.
What's the point?
Growth is forward, open.
Protection is backwards, closed.
You can't do both of
them at the same time.
>>LISA: You can't be in growth
and in death at the same time,
essentially.
>>LIPTON: Exactly.
And yet, look at the world
we live in, 24/7, 365 stress.
The news, the economics,
all this stuff going on.
So what are we doing?
Every day we're taking the
growth medium called blood
and putting it into a chemistry
that actually shuts down
the maintenance of the system.
And the significance of that
is you cannot sustain stress.
Nature never intended that.
>>LISA: For long periods
of time, that's true.
>>LIPTON: Nature was like, OK,
I'm being chased by a lion.
Now, I'm glad I got a
stress system because that's
going to let me run like hell
to get away from the lion.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: But once I get away
from lion, it's like, oh, OK.
Things are good, and
I go back to growth.
>>LISA: And actually
there's a response
that happens there that
allows you to relax, right?
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
But we don't have that in the
world that we live in today.
We are always running
from that lion.
Even our Darwinian Theory says
you better run from the lion
because it's a struggle
for your existence.
So we have built
in a belief that
even causes us to release
this kind of chemistry,
which is totally destructive.
>>LISA: So to chunk this
up into our human level,
if we're constantly in
survival for our jobs
and terrified of being fired,
or eating terrible food for us,
those are constant
stress responses?
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
Those are that-- the chemistry
of our blood to those stimuli
are not supportive
of growth at all.
In fact, they even shut
off the immune system.
So the more stress
you're under, not only
are you not feeding your cells
and keeping them healthy,
you're actually even
shutting off the protection
system inside the
body to-- actually,
the reason why is just
to conserve energy
for fight or flight.
>>LISA: But it's your perception
of that stress, though.
I remember when I interviewed
you many years ago
and I was a professional athlete
and I asked you at that time,
because I was training
very hard and I said,
does this level of
this vigorous exercise
put my body into stress?
And I specifically remember
you, on my radio show you said,
it's your perception of it.
>>LIPTON: Yes.
>>LISA: Can I tell
you something?
>>LIPTON: Please.
>>LISA: That carried with
me every race that I won.
Because it was that--
it's my perception
of this level of impact
that I'm putting on my body
right now as a positive impact.
And it made me so
happy and so excited
when I was in that state
of physical activity--
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
>>LISA: -it changed my entire
relationship to exercise.
>>LIPTON: Well,
that's the whole idea.
It's like there's
a world out there,
and then there's
our interpretation.
And the world may
be totally healthy,
and yet we see it as caustic,
or toxic, or noxious.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: And the
fact is I send signals
to my cells from
that interpretation.
What's the point?
The cells don't know the
environment's good or bad,
they're only taking
the information
that my brain is sending.
So if I look at the world and
say, oh, my god, it's toxic
and it's scary--
>>LISA: Constantly, yes.
>>LIPTON: -then the
chemistry I will release
will tell the cells
that the world is scary
and they better get
into protection.
And the fact is, well, is
the world really scary?
And I go, no, that was
just your belief about it.
So all of a sudden--
and the same thing
works in the opposite.
You could be in a very
toxic environment,
but you change your
interpretation of that.
And you look and it's
not threatening to me.
Well, and all of
a sudden it says,
it might be toxic on the
outside, but on the inside
you will keep the harmony and
growth of the system going.
So all of a sudden, you
realize the health of your body
is indirectly connected
to the environment
because in between
the environment
and your body is the mind.
And so it's really
you're responding
to your mind, your belief
and our perceptions
about this environment.
>>LISA: That is so
interesting because it really,
really, really does show if
you're in a toxic environment,
if it's a bad relationship,
if it's a bad job, if it's
poor health, it absolutely
negatively impacts
your entire cellular structure.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
And it's the chemistry--
>>LISA: It'll make you
want to get out that.
If you realize that
on a cellular level
that will kick you into
gear to get yourself out
of that situation.
>>LIPTON: That's right.
And really it's up to us.
And all of a sudden,
that's why I say,
it's self-empowerment
because it was well,
do you want to believe
that it's toxic
or do you want to believe
that it's not toxic?
That's your choice.
And this one is so
weird, I just have
to bring it in because
everyone's so concerned about
well, if I eat this
sugar I'm going to die
or something like that.
And I say, again,
it's a belief issue.
And here's why I bring it up.
It's kind of weird,
but in the south
we have fundamentalists
that work themselves up
in a state of religious ecstasy.
And in that religious
ecstasy, they
do something they call testify.
They want to show that
God is protecting them
so they do strange things.
Some of them are snake
handlers and they
play with poisonous snakes,
rattlesnakes, and copperheads.
>>LISA: This is the extreme.
>>LIPTON: This is extreme.
But extreme or not, it
really shows what's possible.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: And even if they
get bitten by the snakes,
there's no adverse consequences.
And I call those the amateurs.
Because the real testifying
guys that really blow my mind,
they drink strychnine
poison in toxic doses
with the absolute belief
that God will protect them.
And you know what?
No harmful consequences.
>>LISA: Do not try
that at home, however.
>>LIPTON: No.
I actually, even if
I'm aware of that,
I'm not going to drink
any of that stuff.
>>LISA: But, OK, so
now the bottom line
here is the entire
environment around us,
no matter what, even
the placebo effect,
has been shown to
significantly improve health.
>>LIPTON: Well, that's
what it's all about.
And I'm glad you
brought that up, Lisa,
because the placebo
effect is directly
what I'm talking about.
It says this.
I believe this pill the doctor
said this is it, the newest
thing, and it's got purple
so that's really good color.
This pill is going to save
my life, and I believe that,
and I take the pill and my life
gets better, which happens.
And then you find out later,
but it was just a sugar pill.
And then I say,
OK, what cured you?
The answer is obviously
not the sugar pill.
>>LISA: Right.
>>LIPTON: It was your belief
that the pill was going
to heal you, so it was
your interpretation.
What your body is
doing is saying,
oh, we're taking
this thing that's
going to heal us so the
body starts sending healing
chemistry even before
you start taking the pill
it will already
start doing that.
>>LISA: It's so magical.
>>LIPTON: And here's
how magical it
is, a fact and people should
really recognize this.
One-third of all
medical healings,
be they drug or surgery
related, one-third strictly
placebo effect.
>>LISA: Is it that high?
>>LIPTON: It's that high.
It's that high.
And so while we're
doing this, please let's
add the other side
of the picture
because people always reference
the placebo effect about how
this positive thinking
can create health.
And what I want to
tell you is this.
It's not positive thinking,
it's thinking affects health
for this reason.
There's a word that
science has given it,
but the public's
not aware of it.
It's called the nocebo effect.
Nocebo is a negative thought.
What is a negative
thought, the influence?
We only talked about
the positive thought.
And I go, no, no.
Science has revealed
that negative thoughts
and positive thoughts
are equally powerful,
but they work in
opposite directions.
A positive thought can heal
you, but a negative thought
can actually kill you.
And it's the same
mechanism, it's
just that the thought is
translated into chemistry.
The chemistry
matches the thought.
>>LISA: Hallelujah!
This is exactly, yes.
>>LIPTON: And we have to own
that because psychologists tell
us that about 70%
of our thoughts
are negative and redundant.
>>LISA: I believe that, yeah.
>>LIPTON: So it says, just
in your everyday life,
what are you doing?
You're secreting--
>>LISA: Constantly,
>>LIPTON: -chemistry that is
taking away your vitality.
>>LISA: And this has to do with
the subconscious mind, though.
>>LIPTON: The conscious and the
subconscious mind are the two,
and it's interesting
because they're two minds
and that's where all
the problems arise.
Because when people talk about
my mind, and I go, oh, wait.
There's two parts--
>>LISA: Which one?
>>LIPTON: -to this
mind and each part
has a different function
and different activity.
And therefore, you have to
understand what the two are
and how they interact
with each other.
And when you
understand that, that's
where your personal
empowerment comes back.
>>LISA: So we can override the
subconscious negative programs
with the conscious programming
of willfulness, happiness,
positivity.
But there's more specifics
that you can get into.
>>LIPTON: Yeah, basically.
Let's talk about what the
difference between the two
minds are, OK?
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: The conscious
mind is the latest
evolutionary advance.
It's actually a
piece of the brain
right behind your forehead
called the prefrontal cortex.
And I say, well, what is the
role of the conscious mind?
Well, I tell you,
the conscious mind
is your connection to yourself.
Your personal identity.
Your spirit.
Who you are.
That's coming in from
the conscious mind, OK?
And I say, OK, that's our
source of personal identity.
And I go, the conscious
mind is also very creative.
It's a creative mind.
It can tell us, Lisa, what
are you doing next week?
And the significance about that
is well, next week's not here,
but if you can give me
an answer, by definition,
you are already
expressing creativity.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: I go, OK, but here's
where the core thing is.
The conscious mind is the
source of your personal wishes
and your personal desires,
and your personal aspirations,
this creative mind.
So I say, oh, conscious mind
has what you want out of life.
It has all your wishes
and all your desires.
So when you're operating
from the conscious mind,
it's going to feed the system
the chemistry to support
what you really
want out of life.
>>LISA: That's where your
goals are located, and that's--
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
That's your creat-- because
you haven't acquired them yet
by definition,
your conscious mind
is going to create
what your goal is.
>>LISA: Is that what
your visions are also?
Do you just--
>>LIPTON: Absolutely,
because they're not real yet.
So your conscious mind is
wishes, desires, aspirations.
It's also positive thinking.
>>LISA: And if you can imagine
it and see it, then you can--
>>LIPTON: Then it's manifesting
from this conscious mind, OK?
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>LIPTON: So I go,
that's really cool.
And I say, OK, conscious mind
is you, creativity, et cetera.
And I say, what about
the subconscious mind?
You go, oh, that's
the rest of the brain
besides that little
frontal piece.
>>LISA: That's an
enormous amount.
>>LIPTON: Yeah,
because the brain
was evolved before
consciousness evolved.
And it was-- so consciousness
was an add on more or less.
And interesting as
an add on option,
most people don't even use it.
But the subconscious is
essentially the whole brain.
I say, well, what
is the subconscious?
Oh, It's more like a
record playback device.
It records your experiences, and
then at the push of a button,
it can play them back.
And every time you
push it back, it's
a very accurate recording thing.
So every time you
push it back, it's
going to play the same thing
over and over and over again.
>>LISA: And all this is
imprinted in the first seven
years of your life, right?
>>LIPTON: Well, the fundamental
beliefs are put into it
and so it's a habitual mind,
but the first habits are really
acquired from your instincts
and your experiences.
And so here-- what
we now know is this.
The first six years of
your life, your brain's
not even operating at
the conscious level.
Its EEG, the predominant
brain state, is called theta.
Alpha, the next higher
level is consciousness.
Theta is just below
consciousness.
It's a state of imagination.
Well, that's where kids are from
especially between two and six.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: They mix the
imaginary and the real world.
Why?
Their brain is operating at a
level of theta, imagination.
But it's also this
brain state of hypnosis.
What it means is this.
The first six
years of your life,
you're not really conscious,
you're in a state of hypnosis.
You observe everyone around you,
specifically your parents first
and then your family
and community.
What are you observing?
You're observing their
behaviors and you're
downloading their behaviors
and their responses.
>>LISA: It's not what you
say, it's what you do.
>>LIPTON: And that's the issue.
And that's why parents don't
realize, every move they make,
the child is like the
record button is on.
It's not off, it's on.
So everything that the
parents are doing is recorded.
So the first programs in
your subconscious mind
are not even yours.
They're acquired by downloading
other people's beliefs.
>>LISA: So all of my
relationship to everything
is being recorded by my child?
>>LIPTON: By your
child, absolutely.
And this is not a new thing
because the Jesuits were
very proud of the fact that
they say, give me a child
and I will show you the man.
What do they know
is if I can get
the programming
of the child, then
I will control the
outcome of that person.
Or they would sometimes
say, give me a child
until it's six or
seven and it will
belong to the church for
the rest of its life.
What they knew is that
if I can instill a belief
system in there before
seven years of age,
then that belief system
is going to be fundamental
in the subconscious, OK?
So now here's the
issue that most people
have a problem with.
>>LISA: OK.
>>LIPTON: Most of us walk
down the street saying,
yes, I'm controlling
my life with my wishes
and my desires, my
positive thinking.
And I go, that's really
cool except science
has revealed that
that's not true at all.
Science has revealed that
we operate 5% of the time
from our conscious
mind, which means
we operate 95% of the time
from our subconscious mind.
You say, well, how come?
And I go, remember the conscious
mind is not time bound.
I asked you what are
you doing next week
and you gave me an answer.
I say, Lisa, what
did you do last week?
And your mind goes
back to last week.
And I say, while
we're sitting here,
solve the square root of 3.
And your mind will
disconnect, go up in your head
and start solving.
And so basically it says
this, the conscious mind
is not always present.
It's thinking.
Well, it turns out it's
thinking 95% of the time.
Well, here's the problem.
If the conscious mind is engaged
in some kind of thinking,
then it's not paying
attention, and the default
is the subconscious.
So every time your conscious
mind is thinking a thought,
you then go into the
subconscious program.
So our issue is this.
How come positive
thinking doesn't work?
And I go, because you're
only using it 5% of the time.
95% of the time, you're
operating off the subconscious.
And then here's the conflict.
>>LISA: Right, how do you?
>>LIPTON: The subconscious
is not even basically
your behavior.
You got it from other people.
>>LISA: But how do you change
that subconscious programming,
or?
>>LIPTON: First, recognize it.
>>LISA: OK.
Good start.
>>LIPTON: You have to recognize
you have this subconscious
programming, OK?
And most people don't
because they still think,
oh, I'm operating my life
with my conscious creativity.
And I go, 5%.
95% you're playing these
subconscious programs you
got from your family.
And as I love to
say in the lectures
because most people
laugh because they're
so familiar with it.
I say look, you have
a very close friend.
You know your friend's
behavior, and you
happen to know your
friend's parent.
And I say, then someday
you casually recognize
that your friend shares
some of the same behavior
as their parents, so you say
your friend, hey, you know,
Bill, you're just like your dad.
And you back away from Bill.
>>LISA: And you get mad.
>>LIPTON: Because Bill's
the one that's like,
how-- how can you
compare me to my dad?
And I go, well,
there are two very
profound points from
one simple story,
and profound point
number one is this.
Everyone else can see that
Bill behaves like his dad;
it's only Bill who
doesn't see it.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>LIPTON: And this
is very profound.
Why does he behave like his dad?
Because he got the program
in the first five years
by observing his dad.
So when his mind is
not paying attention,
he plays his father's behavior.
But because his mind's
not paying attention,
he doesn't see it, OK?
And profound point number two.
>>LISA: OK, because I want to--
yeah, how do you change this?
OK.
>>LIPTON: I'm going
to get to that.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>LIPTON: Profound point
number two is we are all Bill,
and that's what we have to own.
95% of our behavior
is invisible to us.
And most of that behavior
has been programmed
by other people, and
it has their beliefs
or wishes not ours, or
their way of life, not ours.
And so it turns out,
are we living the lives
that we really want?
Or are we living
the lives that we've
been programmed to live, OK?
And how important
is this programming?
This is a very important fact
that people have to gather.
When a child is adopted
into a family that
has a lineage of cancer,
the adopted child
will get the family cancer
with the same propensity
as any of the natural siblings.
>>LISA: You're kidding.
Without the--
>>LIPTON: Without the genetics.
And what it turned out is,
as I said, 90% of cancer
is lifestyle.
90% of cancers, how do you
learn to respond to the world?
I say, well, you learn
this from your parents,
whether you're adopted
or you're genetic family,
it's still you're learning
the same behavior.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>LIPTON: So the
cancer is expressed
in the adopted
child just the same.
Again--
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>LIPTON: -important point.
It's not in your genes;
it's in your response
to the environment.
>>LISA: Response to
the environment, yes.
>>LIPTON: So now--
>>LISA: OK, so then-- all
right, so how do you change it?
I'm going to ask you,
how do you change it?
What do you do with
this information?
How do we know and how we move
forward with this information?
>>LIPTON: OK.
Well, let's put it this way.
What if you-- first
question is this,
what-- eliminate the
subconscious for a minute
and just say, if
you could live just
from your conscious mind,
which has your wishes
and desires and aspirations,
what would your life be like?
And now I'm going
to say, most people
have done this in a
period of their life
and they didn't
realize it, but they'll
know the period
I'm talking about.
And that is, when you fall
deeply in love with somebody.
>>LISA: Oh, everyone
remembers that, yes.
>>LIPTON: OK.
I call it the honeymoon effect.
And I say, what is
the honeymoon effect?
And I say, well, go back to that
time you fell deeply in love
with somebody.
And I say, were you healthy?
And almost everybody says oh,
I was exuberantly healthy.
I say, did you have energy?
And they say, of course, we
had an abundance of energy.
And I go, was life so beautiful
when you were in the honeymoon
that--
>>LISA: Rose-colored glasses.
>>LIPTON: Rose-colored glasses.
Life was heaven on
Earth, wasn't it?
And I go, that was
not an accident.
That was a creation.
Because science has now
recognized the unique fact
when you fell in love
like that, you absolutely
operated almost primarily
from the conscious mind
and did not go into
the default program.
>>LISA: In that
short period of time,
you're operating from
the conscious mind.
>>LIPTON: And it's
also-- another term
is like being mindful,
or Buddhist mindfulness.
It's the same idea.
It says what?
If I don't know operate from
the subconscious programs
with its limiting beliefs
that were acquired
and I'm operating only
from the mind that
has wishes and desires
and aspirations,
then every decision
and every action
is done with my wish and
my desire attached to it.
OK, when two people
come together
and they're both in
the honeymoon effect,
then they're both creating
from their conscious minds
and this is called
the honeymoon.
And now you might then say--
>>LISA: Well, how
come it doesn't last?
>>LIPTON: How come
it doesn't last?
And that's a perfect
question for this reason
is why doesn't it last?
And the answer is this.
Because at some
point life gets busy.
You still have to pay the rent,
you still got to fix the car.
You still have to do these
things, so what is it?
Your mind starts to think about
oh, what am I going to do?
What's my schedule?
What's on my agenda?
>>LISA: Enter in stress.
>>LIPTON: And stress
and all these things.
So now let's say
you and I are having
this wonderful relationship and
we're in the honeymoon thing,
and I'm thinking
about all of a sudden,
oh, I got to pay the rent.
How am I'm going to do this?
And you come up and you
ask me some simple question
and I'm in this state, and I
turn around and go, Lisa, blah,
blah, blah, blah.
And you look at me and
you go, who are you?
>>LISA: Where's the
honeymoon effect?
>>LIPTON: Where's
the honeymoon now?
And the answer is, what
happened, and here's what
happened.
Up to now, we were
both operating
from our conscious
wishes and desires.
At that moment when you
ask me that question,
my conscious mind was
busy, so what do I do?
Default, subconscious.
Whose behavior is in there?
My father's.
>>LISA: Your programming--
>>LIPTON: And all
of a sudden, you
see this behavior that
was my father's, right?
And it came out and you
looked at me and said, look,
I've been with you for
this whole period of time.
I never saw this.
Who are you with that behavior?
And here's where the problem
comes in in the relationship
because, as I mentioned before,
did I even see what I said?
No, because I was coming
from my subconscious mind.
So all of a sudden
you say, who are you?
And all of a sudden I feel,
what do you mean who am I?
I've always been this way?
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
>>LIPTON: And it's like,
well, that's absolutely true,
but I never-- I didn't see
what I just said either.
>>LISA: This could explain why
the divorce rate is so high.
>>LIPTON: Exactly.
Because what happens is as
the relationship continues,
as life gets involved and more
and more of these subconscious
programs start showing up, they
were not part of the honeymoon.
If they started
off on day one, you
may have not gotten to day two.
But you did the honeymoon,
but now these show up
and now you're in
a funny position.
It's like, I really
love the honeymoon part.
These new behaviors I'm
not really happy with,
but I'll compromise.
OK, I'll accept
those lousy behaviors
because I really love
this honeymoon stuff.
>>LISA: Right.
Because I want that back.
Because I want the honeymoon.
>>LIPTON: And yet, the
glow of the honeymoon
starts to disappear now
we have life again here.
But the question is this.
But if a lot of these behaviors
show up and a lot of them
may be not even something
you want to compromise with,
that then ultimately
went from honeymoon
to compromise to separation.
And that's a result of I can't
compromise that much anymore.
So now, finally,
what would happen
if you could reprogram the mind?
What if you could
reprogram that subconscious
so that it had the exact
same beliefs of your wishes
and desires?
The significance on a
piece of paper is simple.
That means if your
mind starts to wander
and you kick into
the subconscious,
you'll still be playing
the same behaviors
that you used in the honeymoon.
Guess what?
Perpetual honeymoon.
>>LISA: So you can control
this with the conscious mind.
And to wrap all of this up
and all of this together,
this is how you change
the environment back
to the healthy environment
in the Petri dish
is with the conscious mind.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely,
because the conscious mind
is the one that
puts the chemistry
and that fits what you
want out of life, not
the program that you received.
Now if I can create
heaven on Earth
and you could create
heaven on Earth,
then I start to realize that
my neighbors are creating
heaven on Earth,
and these people.
At some point, you
realize, well, Earth
could be heaven if everybody
just put in their own,
you know, their
wishes and desires
and got rid of the
bad programming that's
been passed from
generation to generation.
It didn't just come
from my parents.
My parents had
parents who gave them
the belief that they
passed on to me.
>>LISA: This is-- exactly.
This is what it means to
change the environment,
your perception of
the environment.
And if critical
mass can do that,
this is how you create
spontaneous evolution.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
And that's--
>>LISA: Which is the
name of your book.
>>LIPTON: -why I get
so excited about,
look, if we had knowledge
that was incorrect
and we operate from
that knowledge,
then by definition, a lack of
knowledge is a lack of power.
If we get this new information
out to the public and say,
you're not a victim.
You're a powerful person.
You could drink
strychnine if you want to.
Not that I'm
interested in doing it.
>>LISA: I don't suggest that.
>>LIPTON: But the fact is,
you can do all these things.
And the issue then
says, we're not
dependent on other
people for our happiness,
we just have to look at
what's been conflicting.
And it turns out, it's
not your conscious mind
that's conflicting.
The conscious mind has all
that positive thinking.
But the default mind
takes 95% of the show.
If you become aware of it--
>>LISA: And change
your perception.
>>LIPTON: -change, you
can change these beliefs.
And the issue about changing
beliefs, very quickly, is
a lot of people
say, well, I'm just
going to give myself
a good talking to.
I'm going to say,
you know, Bruce,
you're trying to take
care of your weight here
and you have this
donut in your hand.
And it's like, what are
you doing with that donut?
And then you get
mad at yourself.
What are you doing with this
stupid donut, you know, blah,
blah, blah.
And you get mad at yourself
and you're talking to yourself,
don't do that, don't do that.
And I say, who are
you talking to?
And the issue is, well, I'm
talking to my subconscious
mind.
I go, well, that's where
the problem comes from.
There's nobody in the
subconscious mind.
It's a machine, it's a recorder.
I say you have a tape recorder,
it's playing a program,
and I say go up and
talk to it and tell me
when the program changes.
The answer is it won't change.
It doesn't--
>>LISA: So how do you
put the donut down?
>>LIPTON: Well, you have
to push the record button
and put a new program
into the subconscious.
There's a record process, OK?
And I say, well, how does
the subconscious mind learn?
Not the way the
conscious mind learns.
Conscious mind, creative,
read a self-help book.
At the end of the book
I say, here's a quiz.
Did you really learn
what was in the book?
You say, yeah, I got 100.
I say, great.
You really know about
this self-help book.
Did your life change?
No.
And I go, why?
Because you educated
your conscious mind.
The subconscious
mind learns primarily
from habit or hypnosis, like it
learned in the first six years
is hypnosis.
After that, how did
you learn something?
You repeated it and you
repeated it and you repeated it.
That's how the
subconscious mind learns.
So reading a self-help book does
not change the subconscious.
>>LISA: But what does is
making the conscious decisions
and repeating--
>>LIPTON: To make a habit.
>>LISA: -habitually, yes.
>>LIPTON: Make a
habit out something.
>>LISA: That's a great point.
And that-- it's beautiful how
you tied all of this together,
how you took the concept of
our positive thoughts really do
impact the genes and move
us towards a place of growth
and the cells towards
a place of growth.
You have to then repeat it and
change your perception of it
in order to create that healthy
environment for ourselves.
This can also happen in
our environment, so--
>>LIPTON: Oh, absolutely.
And just so I
don't want to leave
people that just have
to work like a habit.
There is a new field called
energy psychology, which
is a super learning
process, which
is a very effective way of
pushing the record button
and changing beliefs in
a short period of time.
>>LISA: You can do that.
You could do hypnosis.
You could do
subconscious programming.
You can do all those
different things.
>>LIPTON: All of those things,
but you have to do a process.
You can't just sit there and
say, OK, don't do that anymore.
Don't do that.
>>LISA: Right.
Pure will.
>>LIPTON: That's
not doing anything.
>>LISA: Right.
But those other programs
are very, very effective.
>>LIPTON: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Thank you so much for
your incredible contribution
to our evolution
and through science
that you've explained
everything so clearly, and so
passionately and beautifully,
and so inspirationally.
Is that a word?
Thank you so much, Dr. Lipton.
>>LIPTON: Lisa, thank
you so very much.
And I really want to thank
all the people out there
for a very simple reason.
It's that we're all in an
evolutionary process right now
in that this is us
and we are powerful
and we can change this
world back into the garden
that it was once.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
Beautifully said.
Thank you so much
for being a part
of this conscious evolution.
If you'd like to watch a
replay of this great interview
with Dr. Bruce Lipton or
share it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
There's a lot more thought
provoking interviews
and inspirational
films there as well.
So just go to gaiamtv.com.
You can sign up for a free
trial membership right there.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.